TIFF 6.0 Specification
Final—June 3, 1992
9
If you need more than 10 tags, we suggest that you reserve a single private tag,
define it as a LONG TIFF data type, and use its value as a pointer (offset) to a
private IFD or other data structure of your choosing. Within that IFD, you can use
whatever tags you want, since no one else will know that it is an IFD unless you
tell them.
Submitting a Proposal
Any person or group that wants to propose a change or addition to the TIFF speci-
fication should prepare a proposal that includes the following information:
• Name of the person or group making the request, and your affiliation.
• The reason for the request.
• A list of changes exactly as you propose that they appear in the specification.
Use inserts, callouts, or other obvious editorial techniques to indicate areas of
change, and number each change.
• Discussion of the potential impact on the installed base.
• A list of contacts outside your company that support your position. Include
their affiliation.
Please send your proposal to devsup-person@adobe.com.
The TIFF Advisory Committee
The TIFF Advisory Committee is a working group of TIFF experts from a number
of hardware and software manufacturers. It was formed in the spring of 1991 to
provide a forum for debating and refining proposals for the 6.0 release of the TIFF
specification.
If you are a TIFF expert and think you have the time and interest to work on this
committee, contact devsup-person@adobe.com for further information. For the
TIFF 6.0 release, the group met every two or three months, usually on the west
coast of the U.S. Accessibility via Internet email is a requirement for membership,
since that has proven to be an invaluable means for getting work done between
meetings.
Other TIFF Extensions
The Aldus TIFF sections on CompuServe and AppleLink
(new location is under
construction; check the Adobe WWW home page (http://www.adobe.com) for
future developements) will contain proposed TIFF extensions from other compa-
nies that are not approved by Adobe as part of Baseline TIFF.
These proposals typically represent specialized uses of TIFF that do not fall
within the domain of publishing or general graphics or picture interchange. Gen-
erally, these features will not be widely supported. If you do write files that incor-
porate these extensions, be sure to either not call them TIFF files or mark them in
some way so that they will not be confused with mainstream TIFF files.